---
title: Selected Etak Hardware & Brochures
layout: entry
order: 906
presentation: side-by-side
---

**Designed as an accessory that could be installed in any car, the Etak Navigator displayed in this case is the first "electronic road map."** Unlike our modern map apps, however, it operated without the aid of **GPS**. Instead, Etak combined "augmented dead reckoning" and "map matching" to update, in real time, a user’s location on a digital map. Dead reckoning is the process of determining one’s current location based on a previous position and estimated speed, direction, and elapsed time. The Etak Navigator’s dead reckoning system depended on a compass and wheel sensors that detected strips of magnetic tape adhered to the inside of two of the car’s wheels. These sensors counted rotations of the tires, computing a new position from the previous one every second and matching these new coordinates to a digital street network. As the vehicle moved, the map would shift and rotate beneath an arrow symbol, maintaining the vehicle’s bearing and position along the way. This cartographic convention---an unmoving arrow in the center of a moving map display---is so ubiquitous now that we barely notice it, but it began with Etak. The Etak Navigator took its name from the Micronesian word *etak*, which describes a form of oceangoing dead reckoning that combined sea currents and constellations.

`insert detail of address matching success rate`

The Etak’s digital map files were stored on magnetic tape cassettes and displayed as vector data on a small screen by way of a cathode ray tube graphics processor. Three cassettes would cover the area greater San Francisco- Oakland-San Jose area. Outside of navigation, some digital mapping professionals also used the Etak software for the address matching process described in the section on "Analyzing Nature."